In the previous video,
we looked at accessing an element in an array,
looping through an array using the traditional for loop
and printing the array to the output using a static method
on the java.util.Arrays class.
In this video we are going to look at the methods
on the java.util.Arrays class more closely,
because it would be a rare event
if you created an array of data and didn't wish
to use some of the methods supplied you
by this valuable utility class in Java.
We will also briefly talk about the ArrayList and List,
which are alternative methods for manipulating
collections of data and which may find
their way into an exam question.
Note that Lists and ArrayLists are subjects under the
Section Programming Abstractly Through Interfaces,
but it seems appropriate to discuss
some of their methods here in conjunction with arrays.
So, the javadoc definition
of the java.util.Arrays class is as follows:
The class contains various methods for manipulating arrays,
such as sorting and searching.
This class also contains a static factory that allows
arrays to be viewed as lists.
So, the slide that I've got on screen lists
some of the methods available to you
to manipulate data in an array
or through the list interface.
So, firstly in terms of the type of functionality
for comparison purposes,
the arrays class methods are:
compare, which is from Java nine,
compareUnsigned, also a Java nine version,
deepEquals and equals
and you can see over to the right
the List Interface methods:
equals and isEmpty.
Next, for searching through arrays
we've got a binarySearch, array class method
and also mismatch, which just came in Java nine
and the List Interface methods are
contains, containsAll, indexOf and lastIndexOf.
For data manipulation of an array we've got:
deepHashCode, deepToString, fill, hashCode,
parallelPrefix, which is new in Java eight,
parallelSort, also Java eight,
parallelSetAll, Java eight,
setAll, Java eight,
as well as sort and toString.
And the List Interface methods:
add, addAll, clear, get, hashCode, remove,
removeAll, replaceAll, retainAll,
set, size and sort.
For data transformation we've got:
asList, copyOf, copyOfRange,
spliterator, which is Java eight
and stream, also Java eight.
The List Interface methods we've got:
copyOf, which is Java ten,
iterator, listIterator,
of, which is Java nine,
spliterator, Java eight
and subList and toArray.
Right, so let's write some code now to explore
some of the methods that I showed on those slides,
starting with comparing arrays.
Right, so I'm going to create a new class
in our existing project arrays.
We'll call it ArrayComparison.
(mouse clicks)
(keyboard typing)
So this code has got no surprises
for anybody that reviews
what we just mentioned in the last video.
So setting up some test data there as you can see initially.
Converting the arrays to lists
and then we're comparing the arrays
using Object.equals.
Now, Object.equals is the method array uses
if you call equals directly on an array
and it's only true if the arrays have equal references.
Arrays with the same set of data but different references
will not be considered equal by this method
and just to confirm that, if I run this,
the Object.equals has returned false
in the case of copyOfFirstString
and true for firstStringReference.
Right, so let's add some code now
to use the Arrays.equals
as opposed to the Object.equals method.
(keyboard typing)
We'll run this now.
So you can see here that Arrays.equals looks
at the array elements to determine
if the arrays are equal,
not just comparing the reference
and notice also that even though
our unsorted array has the same elements,
they're in a different order and therefore
the arrays are not considered equal by this method.
All right.
So moving on let's take a look at another method,
Arrays.compare.
And that was introduced in Java nine.
Firstly I'll run this
and then we'll talk about it a bit more.
First, to understand the compare method,
you need to understand what an array prefix is.
So, a prefix is a set of elements in common,
starting at element index zero,
or alternatively an index we define
and we'll look at that a bit later.
If we compare two String arrays
that have the exact same elements,
the prefix is the entire set of elements.
If we compare the firstString
with the partialString array in our example,
remembering that we've defined those.
So, line 15 for firstString,
partialFirstString on line 21.
The prefix here is the entire partialString
since all elements in partialString exist
in the firstString array,
starting at offset index zero
and in the same order.
If we compare the firstString array
with firstStringUnsorted array in our example,
then there is no prefix,
in other words there is no common set of elements
starting at offset index zero.
The Arrays.compare method then follows these rules:
So, if Arrays.equals is true,
return zero.
If the first array parameter passed is null,
it returns minus one.
Else if the second array is null,
it returns one.
If the length of the first array passed is zero,
it returns zero minus the length of the second array.
If the length of the second array is zero,
it returns the length of the first array minus zero.
If one array represents the entire prefix of another,
the difference in lengths of the arrays is returned.
This number will be negative if you are comparing
the smaller array to the larger array.
If no prefix is identified
then the first element of each array
is compared lexicographically.
This number will be negative
if the first element of the first array
is less than the first element of the second array.
Now, if a prefix is identified,
but neither arrays represent a full subset of the other,
the index where the prefix stops is used
to then compare the elements at that index.
The following table basically restates
what I've just said.
So I'll just leave that on-screen
and just a reminder also that
if you want to grab the slides for this course
watch the bonus video
of the very last video in this course.
Gives you the details you need
to be able to grab those slides and download them
so that you can actually study them
and refer to them offline.
Right, so back to the code now.
If I run this..
and you can see that comparing the firstString
to the copyOfFirstString,
firstString and firstStringReference and so on,
and that's the results,
which hopefully now makes a bit more sense
now that we've been through the,
basically the return values that come back
from Arrays.compare method.
Let's go through a couple more examples
which will hopefully help you understand this.
I've got to paste a bit more code in now.
Okay, so there's the code.
So more comparisons there
and we run the code.
And there's the results.
All right, so moving on now,
I want to look at the Arrays.compare method
to compare a range of elements
rather than the full array
which we've been using so far.
So let's paste in some more code.
All right, so there's the code
that's been pasted in.
So you can see stringArrays that we're using
for our comparisons now.
So starting off we're going to compare
the first three elements of the ordered array
with last three elements of the unsorted array.
And moving on down,
you don't even have to specify
the same number of elements.
So if you run this..
Note that the second result is a two there
because we have two additional elements
in the range we selected
from the first arrays range.
The second arrays range was a complete subset
of the first range,
so the result becomes the difference
in the lengths of the specified ranges
and not a comparison of individual elements.
All right, so I think we've probably exhausted
the Arrays method for comparisons at this point.
Let's try one more segment of code
that demonstrates the List Comparison method,
the equals.
Remember that we created two lists
previously in a class.
So we're going to paste some code in there now,
and just for reminder purposes
the list we created,
the ones there on lines 26 and 27
which haven't been used yet.
So the code we're going to paste in now
is going to use that.
(keyboard typing)
So we'll compare lists here
using .equals.
So the output from this code verifies
that list compares the list elements,
I'm not using the Object.equals method
to compare references only.
Right, so let's end the video here
and in the next one we'll start taking
a look at array search methods.
See you in the next video.